SYNOPSIS
On 29 September 2014, the roll on roll off passenger ferry Pride of Canterbury suffered a major fire in the engine room while berthing in Calais.  There were no injuries but the main engine room was significantly damaged.
It had been established that the starboard controllable pitch propeller was not responding to the controls as Pride of Canterbury was approaching Calais. The shaft was therefore declutched and the two starboard main engines stopped.  The prevailing weather conditions were such that the master was content to proceed using one propeller shaft
and one bow thruster. The chief engineer manually started the starboard controllable pitch propeller system stand-by pump to maintain oil circulation. Shortly afterwards, a pipework joint in the system ruptured, spraying oil onto the exhaust uptakes. The oil ignited, causing a significant fire in the main engine room, which was then evacuated. The general emergency alarm was sounded and the passengers were mustered at emergency stations. The ferry berthed safely, the fire was extinguished using the ship’s hi-fog system and then a fire hose, and the passengers and cargo were disembarked normally.
The investigation determined that:
The back pressure valve in the starboard controllable pitch propeller hydraulic system had jammed shut, causing the oil pressure in the return line from the oil distribution box to rise.
A flanged joint in the return line from the oil distribution box was unable to withstand the high pressure that resulted when a back pressure valve jammed shut.
Some of the joints in the return line from the oil distribution box, including the one that failed, were not shielded to prevent a spray of oil in the event of joint failure.
The back pressure valve had not been tested for functionality during the 23 years it had been in service.
Although the manufacturer’s manual specified the back pressure valve was to be
tested annually, the manual did not specify how this was to be achieved.
While Lloyd’s Register Rules and Regulations required a high temperature alarm and a low pressure alarm to be fitted in the controllable pitch propeller system, there was no requirement for a high pressure alarm.
P&O Ferries has completed modifications to Pride of Canterbury’s controllable pitch propeller systems, and is continuing a programme of similar modifications to its sister ships as they attend refit. Associated procedures to prevent a future similar accident, including testing of pressure safety valves at least every 5 years, have also been introduced. Wartsila has issued a technical bulletin instructing that back pressure valves should be replaced after 15 years. Lloyd’s Register has been recommended to propose to the International Association of Classification Societies a unified requirement for high pressure alarms to be fitted in controllable pitch propeller systems.
