SYNOPSIS
At 1414 on 17 July 2014, the passenger vessel Millennium Time collided with the motor tug Redoubt and its towed barges between Blackfriars Road Bridge and Waterloo Bridge on the River Thames, London. Both vessels were damaged and nine passengers sustained minor injuries. There was no pollution.
The collision occurred after Millennium Time turned unexpectedly towards Redoubt, which was travelling in the opposite direction. The turn was not deliberately initiated by the movement of the helm and most likely resulted from the unintended application of port rudder, and/or the influence of the effects of hydrodynamic interaction. Millennium
Time’s mate was on the helm and he initially assessed that the tug was turning towards the passenger vessel. Consequently, he did not take avoiding action for several seconds. By then, the vessels were too close for the collision to be prevented.
Contributing factors on board Millennium Time included:
The wheelhouse was not fitted with a rudder angle indicator and the vessel was difficult to keep on a steady heading.
The mate did not hold a boatmaster’s licence and his employment as the helmsman was contrary to the operator’s instructions.
The master was providing a sightseeing commentary to the passengers and did not effectively supervise the mate on the helm.
Problems associated with the steering system reduced its effectiveness in meeting the navigational challenges on the River Thames.
The risk of hydrodynamic interaction was increased off the Coin Street moorings where the navigable water available had been reduced by Redoubt being 15m south of its usual track.
Following the collision, the master quickly secured the vessel alongside a moored barge
but the crew appeared to be unable to effectively manage the passengers on board and the vessel’s watertight integrity was not checked. The crew were also unaware of the number of passengers on board.
In August 2014, a recommendation was made to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency intended to ensure that the procedures and control measures adopted on board Millennium Time and its sister vessels were sufficient to enable the vessels to navigate safely on the Thames. Since then, the vessels’ owner and operator, City Cruises, has replaced the vessels’ steering systems.
This report contains a recommendation to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency which seeks to expedite legislation which will restrict the use of grandfather rights for existing domestic passenger vessels. The Port of London Authority has been recommended to assess the impact on safe navigation of the Coin Street moorings and City Cruises has been recommended to take action designed to improve the safe navigation of its vessels.
The Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the Passenger Boat Association have been jointly recommended to explore the use of technology to improve the accuracy of the passenger counts on passenger vessels operating on the River Thames. 
