SUMMARY
At about 2300 on 9 March 2016, the French fishing vessels, Saint Christophe 1 and Sagittaire grounded and started to list on the falling tide while they were berthed alongside in Dartmouth harbour, where they had taken refuge from bad weather. Sagittaire¡¯s crew raised the alarm and rigged chains to support the vessel as the tide fell, but Saint Christophe 1 rolled onto its side and started to flood (Figure 1). Sagittaire re-floated as the tide rose, but Saint Christophe 1 continued to flood and was almost fully submerged at high water. Both crews were evacuated from their vessels without incident, and there was minimal pollution. Saint Christophe 1 was salvaged on 2 April 2016, but was declared a constructive total loss by its insurance company.
The investigation concluded that the South Embankment Quay was an unsuitable berth for Saint Christophe 1 or Sagittaire over low water. The investigation also identified that the Harbour Authority was fully aware that Saint Christophe 1 would ground on the falling tide but, due to language difficulties, its staff were unable to make the fishing vessels¡¯ skippers aware of this.
Following the accident, the Dartmouth Harbour and Navigation Authority took action to improve the information provided to port users on the use of its South Embankment Quay and other moorings. It has also undertaken to conduct a review of its existing risk assessments for the port. Dartmouth Harbour and Navigation Authority has requested the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to conduct a health check of its compliance with the Port Marine Safety Code.
This report makes recommendations designed to ensure that a comprehensive exchange of information is conducted before approval for vessels intending to enter Dartmouth is granted, and appropriate and effective control measures are established to address risks identified by the port.
A recommendation has also been made to the owners of Saint Christophe 1 and Sagittaire which seek improvements in the vessels¡¯ suite of navigational charts, and to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to undertake a Port Marine Safety Code health check for Dartmouth in 2017.