SYNOPSIS
At 1108 on 5 December 2016 the high-speed passenger catamaran Typhoon Clipper and the workboat Alison collided adjacent to Tower Millennium Pier, River Thames, London. Alison capsized and sank immediately; the two crewmen on board were subsequently rescued by Typhoon Clipper's crew. Alison's crewmen were treated at the scene for the symptoms of cold shock, then admitted to hospital for checks before being released later the same day. Alison was recovered off the riverbed the following day by the Port of London Authority; there was no pollution.
Alison's crew had unberthed their vessel from Tower Millennium Pier and headed out into the river without properly assessing the shipping situation or making their intentions clear to other vessels. When the crew of Alison became aware of the risk of collision with Typhoon Clipper, it was too late to take effective avoiding action.
Neither Typhoon Clipper's master nor mate saw Alison before the collision. This happened because Alison was initially obscured by the pier and then moved into Typhoon Clipper's visual blind sector ahead. Typhoon Clipper's forward-looking closed-circuit television camera captured Alison's movements; however, this image was not being displayed in the wheelhouse.
Neither of Alison's crewmen was wearing a personal flotation device; this placed their lives in immediate danger when immersed in cold water. Alison's owner/operator, Crown River Cruises Limited, had not conducted a risk assessment or developed procedures for the safe operation of its workboats. The investigation also identified ambiguities with the Port of London Authority's regulations regarding the keeping of a lookout on vessels with limited visibility and the use of sound signals when departing from piers.
This report makes a safety recommendation to the Port of London Authority intended to clarify the requirement for keeping lookout on vessels with limited visibility and the use of sound signals when entering the Thames fairway. A safety recommendation has also been made to Crown River Cruises Limited to improve safety through the introduction of workboat operating procedures.