SYNOPSIS
At 1231 on 22 December 2019, the starboard forward towline pennant on board the tug Svitzer Mercurius parted and snapped back while the vessel was acting as stern tug to the ultra-large container ship CMA CGM Marco Polo as it berthed in Southampton. The towline and pennant recoiled back toward the tug, breaking one of its forward wheelhouse windows and damaging several others. Five of the seven-man crew, who were standing in the wheelhouse, were sprayed with glass fragments from the broken toughened glass window and suffered multiple minor lacerations. Fortunately, they were all wearing either glasses or sunglasses and no eye injuries occurred.
Svitzer Mercurius had recently changed ownership and had joined Svitzer’s Southampton operations from the Netherlands. It continued to operate with its Dutch crew, who were contracted to provide familiarisation training to Svitzer crews over a 3-month handover period. Svitzer tug masters provided local port knowledge.
The towline pennant was found to have failed at approximately 52% of its original minimum breaking load. Close examination of the pennant indicated that it had previously sustained high shock loads and cyclic load damage to its load-bearing core. Due to its jacketed construction, the core was difficult to examine. Svitzer representatives visited the vessel several times before the tug started work in Southampton, and an independent survey of the tug and its equipment had been carried out. Neither identified existing wear and damage to the pennant nor its unsuitability for further work.
The wheelhouse windows met specific international standards as part of classification society requirements for ‘green seas’ loading. The standards did not require resistance to solid body impact such as a recoiling towline. However, in 2018, the tug manufacturer Damen Shipyards Group had introduced an impact-resistant window glass on its new tugs as standard equipment, having recognised the snapback hazard and potential for serious crew injuries.
The tug’s classification society, Det Norske Veritas, has been recommended to take the findings of this investigation to the International Association of Classification Societies to develop a unified requirement to minimise, in the event of impact from a recoiling towline, the risk of injury from broken window glass to personnel within tug wheelhouses. A recommendation has also been made to the tug operator, Svitzer Marine Limited, to review the risk to wheelhouse crews across its fleet posed by towline snapback and, where it is assessed to be high, evaluate the viability of introducing laminated glass for wheelhouse windows.
