SYNOPSIS
At about 0300 on 18 February 2021, a deckhand fell overboard from the twin rig stern trawler Copious approximately 30 nautical miles south-east of the Shetland Islands. The deckhand was conscious, wearing a lifejacket and was quickly brought alongside the vessel. However, the crew’s attempts to recover the casualty back on board were unsuccessful. He was unresponsive when recovered from the water by a coastguard helicopter and pronounced dead on arrival at hospital.
The deckhand fell overboard while standing on the aft bulwark as he was attempting a repair to the trawl gear. There was no attempt to stop and consider the repair and the activity was not effectively risk assessed or mitigated. He lost his life because he was not recovered back on board before succumbing to the effects of cold water incapacitation. When he lost consciousness in the water, his incorrectly worn lifejacket did not hold his airways clear of the water and he drowned. The man overboard recovery equipment on board Copious was not supplemented by the training and equipment necessary for the recovery of an unconscious person.
Since the accident, the owners of Copious have replaced the vessel with a new, larger vessel incorporating upgraded safety features. They have also introduced an online safety management system including a risk-based approach to working practices on board, such as working at height. Additional man overboard equipment has been purchased that provides an efficient means of recovering an unconscious person and the crew have been provided with new, higher buoyancy inflatable lifejackets, as well as immersion suits for emergency use. The Maritime and Coastguard Agency has amended its guidance to surveyors to consider the following during fishing vessel surveys and inspections: the recovery of unconscious casualties in man overboard procedures and drills; and the correct use of personal flotation devices, especially the use of crotch straps.
No recommendations have been made the owners of Copious in light of the actions that they have taken. A recommendation has been made to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to amend regulations to require fishing vessels to have an efficient means to recover an unconscious person from the water that is demonstrable during surveys and inspections.