SYNOPSIS
At 1505 on 28 March 2020, the Gibraltar registered chemical tanker Key Bora ran aground at Kyleakin pier, Isle of Skye, Scotland. Key Bora’s hull was holed by the grounding and floodwater entered empty ballast tanks; there was no injury or pollution.
Key Bora was approaching Kyleakin pier, and the master was conning from the starboard bridge wing console. This was the first time that the vessel and the master had arrived at this pier and the berthing had been planned to coincide with low water, when slack tidal stream was expected. When Key Bora was very close to the pier, it ran aground on a charted 4.9m obstruction. After 12 minutes aground, Key Bora floated free and was berthed using its own power.
Key Bora ran aground because its passage plan had been based on inaccurate information, including a dredge survey that did not show the charted hazard where the vessel grounded, and misleading tidal stream information. Additionally, the vessel’s electronic chart display and information system had not been used effectively by the crew to warn of danger ahead.
The investigation also identified significant weaknesses in the safety management of the Kyleakin pier, owned and operated by the aquaculture company Mowi Scotland Limited. This included that the site was not being operated in accordance with the Port Marine Safety Code, and there was no marine safety management system. Mowi Scotland Limited had cited both items as risk mitigation measures in its application to Marine Scotland to build the pier; however, these measures had not been implemented before operations commenced. This happened because there was no process in place to ensure that risk mitigation measures, described in the licence application, were in place before operations commenced.
Since the accident, Marine Scotland has added a standard condition to all marine licences requiring licensees to carry out the licensable activity in accordance with the licence, the application, and all plans and programmes submitted as part of the application. This report makes a recommendation to Mowi Scotland Limited to ensure that marine operations at Kyleakin follow the guidance in the Port Marine Safety Code, and to consider upgrading the facility to a statutory harbour authority.
